---
layout: post
title: "Form 4 - It's Out!"
categories:
- Blog
tags:
- formlabs
- hardware
- work
---

It’s been a few months now, but the [Form 4](https://formlabs.com/3d-printers/form-4/) is out! This is Formlabs’s flagship SLA printer that I worked on during my tenure - and I'm excited to be able to talk about it!

When I was first interviewing at Formlabs, my future boss sent me a link to a Form 3 teardown so I could get a sense of the engineering that went into it. He found that the critique was thoughtful and praised the right things. Well, now the same person, bunnie, is out with [a teardown of the Form 4](https://www.bunniestudios.com/blog/2024/formlabs-form-4-teardown/), and you’ll see some familiar initials on the boards. 

During my year at Formlabs, I had my hands all over the Form 4’s electrical system, tuning motors, measuring power consumption, preparing for compliance testing. The main component that I owned was the LCD driver, and it was super cool to be trusted with such a foundational part of the system and integrate it into the larger printer. I left Formlabs before this product launched, so it’s been great to experience the hype around Form 4 from the outside and notice the subtle things that have changed since I was there.

I don’t want to wax poetic. I think we made a good printer, users seem excited about it, and I’m very proud and excited to see this out in the world. It took a lot of great people to make this thing print so consistently, so quickly, and so well. Check it out for yourself!
